README.md, before:

# A conda recipe for the `bash-completion` package.

The [`bash-completion`][1] library provides sophisticated tab completion support for
a large number of command line utilities.  In particular, it is required by the
[`conda-bash-completion`][2] package which provides tab completion for the `conda` command.

Typically we expect users to install these packages into their `base` environment and to
have that environment activated by default.  We patch the upstream source and implement
activation hooks to make this "just work" for the most common case.

Some uses prefer to disable the automatic activation of their `base` environment by
setting `auto_activate_base: false` in their `~/.condarc` file.  These users
will need to append something like the following
```
CONDA_ROOT=~/anaconda3   # <- set to your Anaconda/Miniconda installation directory
source $CONDA_ROOT/etc/profile.d/bash_completion.sh
```
to their `~/.bashrc` script in order to have the completion code loaded.

## MacOS users

We have a challenging situation, since the user's login shell is part of the underlying
OS and not directly controlled by the conda ecosystem. By default MacOS come with a very
old (2007) version of `bash` (3.2.57), whereas the `bash-completion` library requires
4.1.0 from 2010.  However, many MacOS users upgrade this via:

1. [brew](https://brew.sh/)
2. [bespoke packages](https://scriptingosx.com/2019/02/install-bash-5-on-macos/)
3. [conda](https://docs.conda.io/)

They may even choose to set their login shell to use the new version (if they can figure
out how). 

The `bash-completion` package supports the following graceful degradation:

* If the user has upgraded their `bash` and adjusted their login shell, then the advanced
  completion features will be loaded.

* If the user has upgraded their `bash`, but not adjusted their login shell, then the
  advanced completion features only be loaded when they start the newer `bash`.

* If the user has not upgraded their `bash`, then the advanced completion features will
  never be loaded.

If we make this package available to MacOS users, it will work for some, yet not break
anything for others.  Is this acceptable?  (I have no idea what the distribution of the
above 3 cases is like for MacOS users of conda).  Should we leave it there or try to
make things better for default MacOS users?

(Note that patching the whole library to support the older `bash` is not realistic -- it
would be close to a complete rewrite and be hard to support in the long-term).

My feeling is that users that are aware of advanced completion will be running the newer
`bash` anyway and will have already sorted out their login shell, but I could be
completely wrong here.  Perhaps new MacOS conda users could be directed to instructions
for upgrading their login shell?  Perhaps the `bash` could be packaged with the MacOS
installer and `conda init bash` could be modified to (optionally) set the users
login shell appropriately?

Another side case to consider is `conda-bash-completion` -- the completion support for
the `bash` command itself. This could be patched to provide limited completion for older
versions of `bash`. I would not want to put the effort into this unless it is
worthwhile.  Are MacOS users who haven't upgraded their `bash` even aware of advanced
tab completion?  Would they even notice if we went to great lengths to provide it?

### Proposals:

1. Stick with the pacakge as is, but expose it to MacOS. 
2. Document upgrading bash for conda users, including setting their login shell.
3. Package a modern `bash` with the MacOS installer and tweak `conda init bash` to
(optionally) set the user's login shell to it.
4. Patch `conda-bash-completion` to provide limited support the older bash, but keep the
   dependency on `bash-completion`.  

My preference is 1 for now and to have 3 done by someone with significant MacOS
experience.

## Rationale

There a various scenarios we need to account for when patching the upstream to work with
Anaconda.  This is complicated by the conflicting expectations of 'shell integration'
and 'isolated environments'. 

The following is a long, rambling discussion I had (with myself) to try to pin down
a solution that works best for the majority of users and is not too painful for others. 

### How do we handle the simple happy path?

Steps in this Scenario:

1. The target system does not have a system-with installation of `bash-completion`. 

2. The user installs `bash-completion` into the `base` environment, which includes
   installing `/etc/profile.d/bash_completion.sh` under that environment's root.

3. The `conda init bash` hook ensures that installed `bash_completion.sh` script is
   sourced for new shells.

4. Tab completion is dynamically loaded for any commands that have scripts in
   `/share/bash-completion/competions/` under the base environment's root.

This raises the following problem:

**Problem 1:**

> The `/share/bash-completion/completions/` directory under the base environment's root
> is not searched for completion scripts by the upstream library.

Two solutions come to mind:

**Solution 1:**

> Patch the `__load_completion` function in the `bash_completion` library script so the
> "place-holder prefixed" `/share/bash-completion/completions` directory is searched for
> completions.

**Solution 2:**

> Patch the `bash_completion.sh` to ensure the "place-holder prefixed" `/share`
> directory is in `$XDG_DATA_DIRS`. 

Note the "place-holder prefix" is `/opt/anaconda1anaconda2anaconda3` and gets replaced
by the root of the environment that it gets installed into, in our case the `base`
environment.

Both of those solutions will work with the above Scenario and solves Problem 1. 

Additional Problem:
    
**Problem 2:** 

> One problem with Solution 2 is it may change the behaviour of other conda installed
> packages -- those that also search `$XDG_DATA_DIRS`. This would help Anaconda to
> better align itself with the [XDG Base Directory Specification][3] Although this may
> be a good thing, its not really the responsibility of this package, and packages
> should not have potentially far reaching side-effects. 
> 
> This raises the question: should conda activate/deactivate add/remove the target
> environments `/share` directory to/from the `$XDG_DATA_DIRS`?

### What about existing bash-completion users?

This case introduces some alternatives to Step 1 in the above scenario:

10. The target system already has a active system-wide installation of
    `bash-completion` 

11. The target system has system-wide packages installed that provide
    `bash-completion` scripts for their own commands.

12. The system installed version of `bash-completion` is different from the version
    installed into the users `base` environment. 

Naturally this introduces some more problems:

**Problem 3:** 

> In scenario 10, either the system or user `bashrc` scripts will ensure that
> `/etc/profile.d/bash_completion.sh` is sourced early in the initialization process,
> typically before the hooks provided by `conda init bash`.  The `bash_completion.sh`
> script has a check to prevent it from being loaded multiple times, so our conda
> install library is never loaded and none of its completion script directories are
> searched.

**Problem 4:** 

> In scenario 11, we want `bash` completion to work for commands outside of our current
> conda environment, and completion code installed by packages in our active environment
> to supersede those installed system-wide (in the same way that a conda installed
> version of python shadows the system installed version).

**Problem 5:** 

> In scenario 12, we the version of the library that is loaded may be different from the
> version specified by the environment. However, our expectation is that the environment
> version is always preferred.   

**Problem 6:** 

> There is a possibility that system installed completion scripts incompatible with
> certain version of the `bash-completion` library.  Hopefully they have appropriate
> version guards.

Potential solutions:

**Solution 3:**

> Patch `bash-completion.sh` to remove the double load check.
 
This addresses Problem 3, but has the potential to significantly slow down shell and
sub-shell initialization -- the `bash-completion` library is over 2000 lines of shell
script.

**Solution 4:**

> Patch `bash-completion.sh` to ensure the path to the "place-holder prefixed" `/share`
> directory is in `$XDG_DATA_DIRS`, but before the double loading check.
 
This addresses Problem 4, provided we ensure that the path is only added once and that
the path is added before system paths.

**Solution 5:**

> The library sets a `BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` variable, so we can
> patch `bash-completion.sh` to only load the library if the existing version is
> 'different' from the one being loaded.  
 
This saves us from an unnecessary double load, but still allows for the library to be
overridden, addressing Problem 5.

**Solution 6:**

> Patch the upstream library to set `$CONDA_BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` to the same
> value as `$BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` and change the double-loading trap to check
> for `$CONDA_BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` instead of `$BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO`.

This allows the conda packaged version to override the system installed version, even
if the version numbers are the same, provided it is loaded last. 

### What about users who install `bash-completion` into a non-base environment.

Modified Scenario Steps 2 and 4:

20. User installs a version of `bash-completion` in a specific environment.
40. User expects that version of bash completion to be active only that environment.

Solutions 1 and 2 use the "place-holder prefix" so that paths to the library and data
directories are already accounted for in this case.

This introduces some new problems:

**Problem 7:** 

> The appropriate `bash_completion.sh` script is not being sourced.

**Problem 8:** 

> Unloading the completions from the current shell would be very complicated and
> not 100% guaranteed to work.  So a deactivate hook can not be expected to work.

Possible Solutions:

**Solution 7:**

> Add some hook to source the appropriate `bash_completion.sh` on activate.
 
The double load protection from Solution 5 will ensure appropriate cooperation
with this solution and Solution 1. 

**Solution 8:**

> Leave it up to the user to ensure that the appropriate `bash_completion.sh` is
> sourced for non-base installs.

**Solution 9:**

> Ensure the user understands these limitations via package documentation.

### What about users who don't activate the base environment by default?

Yes, some people prefer environments to be activated explicitly.

Additional Scenario Steps:

6. The flag `auto_activate_base` is set to `false` in their `.condarc` file.
7. The user installs `conda-bash-completion` into the base environment.
8. The `bash-completion` package is loaded as a dependency.
9. The user expects tab completion for the `conda` command to be dynamically loaded.

In this case we can't depend on environment activation hooks to help us out.

**Problem 9:** 

> Does the use expect or care that other completion code is being loaded even though the
> environment is not active? 

I think some might care, but they are operating outside of the standard practice so we
should leave it up to them to decide and source the appropriate bits.

### Conclusion

At this point a combination of Solutions 1, 6, 7, and 9 seems to be the best compromise.

**Solution 1:**

> Patch the `__load_completion` function in the `bash_completion` library script so the
> "place-holder prefixed" `/share/bash-completion/completions` directory is searched for
> completions.

**Solution 6:**

> Patch the upstream library to set `$CONDA_BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` to the same
> value as `$BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` and change the double-loading trap to check
> for `$CONDA_BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` instead of `$BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO`.

**Solution 7:**

> Add some hook to source the appropriate `bash_completion.sh` on activate.
 
**Solution 9:**

> Ensure the user understands these limitations via package documentation.

[1]: https://github.com/scop/bash-completion
[2]: https://github.com/tartansandal/conda-bash-completion
[3]: https://specifications.freedesktop.org/basedir-spec/basedir-spec-latest.html

Commit message:

Add note about moving to conda-forge

README.md, after:

# A conda recipe for the `bash-completion` package.

> This recipe has been moved to conda-forge and this repository has been retired.
>
> Please submit issues and pull requests to https://github.com/conda-forge/bash-completion-feedstock.

The [`bash-completion`][1] library provides sophisticated tab completion support for
a large number of command line utilities.  In particular, it is required by the
[`conda-bash-completion`][2] package which provides tab completion for the `conda` command.

Typically we expect users to install these packages into their `base` environment and to
have that environment activated by default.  We patch the upstream source and implement
activation hooks to make this "just work" for the most common case.

Some uses prefer to disable the automatic activation of their `base` environment by
setting `auto_activate_base: false` in their `~/.condarc` file.  These users
will need to append something like the following
```
CONDA_ROOT=~/anaconda3   # <- set to your Anaconda/Miniconda installation directory
source $CONDA_ROOT/etc/profile.d/bash_completion.sh
```
to their `~/.bashrc` script in order to have the completion code loaded.

## MacOS users

We have a challenging situation, since the user's login shell is part of the underlying
OS and not directly controlled by the conda ecosystem. By default MacOS come with a very
old (2007) version of `bash` (3.2.57), whereas the `bash-completion` library requires
4.1.0 from 2010.  However, many MacOS users upgrade this via:

1. [brew](https://brew.sh/)
2. [bespoke packages](https://scriptingosx.com/2019/02/install-bash-5-on-macos/)
3. [conda](https://docs.conda.io/)

They may even choose to set their login shell to use the new version (if they can figure
out how). 

The `bash-completion` package supports the following graceful degradation:

* If the user has upgraded their `bash` and adjusted their login shell, then the advanced
  completion features will be loaded.

* If the user has upgraded their `bash`, but not adjusted their login shell, then the
  advanced completion features only be loaded when they start the newer `bash`.

* If the user has not upgraded their `bash`, then the advanced completion features will
  never be loaded.

If we make this package available to MacOS users, it will work for some, yet not break
anything for others.  Is this acceptable?  (I have no idea what the distribution of the
above 3 cases is like for MacOS users of conda).  Should we leave it there or try to
make things better for default MacOS users?

(Note that patching the whole library to support the older `bash` is not realistic -- it
would be close to a complete rewrite and be hard to support in the long-term).

My feeling is that users that are aware of advanced completion will be running the newer
`bash` anyway and will have already sorted out their login shell, but I could be
completely wrong here.  Perhaps new MacOS conda users could be directed to instructions
for upgrading their login shell?  Perhaps the `bash` could be packaged with the MacOS
installer and `conda init bash` could be modified to (optionally) set the users
login shell appropriately?

Another side case to consider is `conda-bash-completion` -- the completion support for
the `bash` command itself. This could be patched to provide limited completion for older
versions of `bash`. I would not want to put the effort into this unless it is
worthwhile.  Are MacOS users who haven't upgraded their `bash` even aware of advanced
tab completion?  Would they even notice if we went to great lengths to provide it?

### Proposals:

1. Stick with the pacakge as is, but expose it to MacOS. 
2. Document upgrading bash for conda users, including setting their login shell.
3. Package a modern `bash` with the MacOS installer and tweak `conda init bash` to
(optionally) set the user's login shell to it.
4. Patch `conda-bash-completion` to provide limited support the older bash, but keep the
   dependency on `bash-completion`.  

My preference is 1 for now and to have 3 done by someone with significant MacOS
experience.

## Rationale

There a various scenarios we need to account for when patching the upstream to work with
Anaconda.  This is complicated by the conflicting expectations of 'shell integration'
and 'isolated environments'. 

The following is a long, rambling discussion I had (with myself) to try to pin down
a solution that works best for the majority of users and is not too painful for others. 

### How do we handle the simple happy path?

Steps in this Scenario:

1. The target system does not have a system-with installation of `bash-completion`. 

2. The user installs `bash-completion` into the `base` environment, which includes
   installing `/etc/profile.d/bash_completion.sh` under that environment's root.

3. The `conda init bash` hook ensures that installed `bash_completion.sh` script is
   sourced for new shells.

4. Tab completion is dynamically loaded for any commands that have scripts in
   `/share/bash-completion/competions/` under the base environment's root.

This raises the following problem:

**Problem 1:**

> The `/share/bash-completion/completions/` directory under the base environment's root
> is not searched for completion scripts by the upstream library.

Two solutions come to mind:

**Solution 1:**

> Patch the `__load_completion` function in the `bash_completion` library script so the
> "place-holder prefixed" `/share/bash-completion/completions` directory is searched for
> completions.

**Solution 2:**

> Patch the `bash_completion.sh` to ensure the "place-holder prefixed" `/share`
> directory is in `$XDG_DATA_DIRS`. 

Note the "place-holder prefix" is `/opt/anaconda1anaconda2anaconda3` and gets replaced
by the root of the environment that it gets installed into, in our case the `base`
environment.

Both of those solutions will work with the above Scenario and solves Problem 1. 

Additional Problem:
    
**Problem 2:** 

> One problem with Solution 2 is it may change the behaviour of other conda installed
> packages -- those that also search `$XDG_DATA_DIRS`. This would help Anaconda to
> better align itself with the [XDG Base Directory Specification][3] Although this may
> be a good thing, its not really the responsibility of this package, and packages
> should not have potentially far reaching side-effects. 
> 
> This raises the question: should conda activate/deactivate add/remove the target
> environments `/share` directory to/from the `$XDG_DATA_DIRS`?

### What about existing bash-completion users?

This case introduces some alternatives to Step 1 in the above scenario:

10. The target system already has a active system-wide installation of
    `bash-completion` 

11. The target system has system-wide packages installed that provide
    `bash-completion` scripts for their own commands.

12. The system installed version of `bash-completion` is different from the version
    installed into the users `base` environment. 

Naturally this introduces some more problems:

**Problem 3:** 

> In scenario 10, either the system or user `bashrc` scripts will ensure that
> `/etc/profile.d/bash_completion.sh` is sourced early in the initialization process,
> typically before the hooks provided by `conda init bash`.  The `bash_completion.sh`
> script has a check to prevent it from being loaded multiple times, so our conda
> install library is never loaded and none of its completion script directories are
> searched.

**Problem 4:** 

> In scenario 11, we want `bash` completion to work for commands outside of our current
> conda environment, and completion code installed by packages in our active environment
> to supersede those installed system-wide (in the same way that a conda installed
> version of python shadows the system installed version).

**Problem 5:** 

> In scenario 12, we the version of the library that is loaded may be different from the
> version specified by the environment. However, our expectation is that the environment
> version is always preferred.   

**Problem 6:** 

> There is a possibility that system installed completion scripts incompatible with
> certain version of the `bash-completion` library.  Hopefully they have appropriate
> version guards.

Potential solutions:

**Solution 3:**

> Patch `bash-completion.sh` to remove the double load check.
 
This addresses Problem 3, but has the potential to significantly slow down shell and
sub-shell initialization -- the `bash-completion` library is over 2000 lines of shell
script.

**Solution 4:**

> Patch `bash-completion.sh` to ensure the path to the "place-holder prefixed" `/share`
> directory is in `$XDG_DATA_DIRS`, but before the double loading check.
 
This addresses Problem 4, provided we ensure that the path is only added once and that
the path is added before system paths.

**Solution 5:**

> The library sets a `BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` variable, so we can
> patch `bash-completion.sh` to only load the library if the existing version is
> 'different' from the one being loaded.  
 
This saves us from an unnecessary double load, but still allows for the library to be
overridden, addressing Problem 5.

**Solution 6:**

> Patch the upstream library to set `$CONDA_BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` to the same
> value as `$BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` and change the double-loading trap to check
> for `$CONDA_BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` instead of `$BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO`.

This allows the conda packaged version to override the system installed version, even
if the version numbers are the same, provided it is loaded last. 

### What about users who install `bash-completion` into a non-base environment.

Modified Scenario Steps 2 and 4:

20. User installs a version of `bash-completion` in a specific environment.
40. User expects that version of bash completion to be active only that environment.

Solutions 1 and 2 use the "place-holder prefix" so that paths to the library and data
directories are already accounted for in this case.

This introduces some new problems:

**Problem 7:** 

> The appropriate `bash_completion.sh` script is not being sourced.

**Problem 8:** 

> Unloading the completions from the current shell would be very complicated and
> not 100% guaranteed to work.  So a deactivate hook can not be expected to work.

Possible Solutions:

**Solution 7:**

> Add some hook to source the appropriate `bash_completion.sh` on activate.
 
The double load protection from Solution 5 will ensure appropriate cooperation
with this solution and Solution 1. 

**Solution 8:**

> Leave it up to the user to ensure that the appropriate `bash_completion.sh` is
> sourced for non-base installs.

**Solution 9:**

> Ensure the user understands these limitations via package documentation.

### What about users who don't activate the base environment by default?

Yes, some people prefer environments to be activated explicitly.

Additional Scenario Steps:

6. The flag `auto_activate_base` is set to `false` in their `.condarc` file.
7. The user installs `conda-bash-completion` into the base environment.
8. The `bash-completion` package is loaded as a dependency.
9. The user expects tab completion for the `conda` command to be dynamically loaded.

In this case we can't depend on environment activation hooks to help us out.

**Problem 9:** 

> Does the use expect or care that other completion code is being loaded even though the
> environment is not active? 

I think some might care, but they are operating outside of the standard practice so we
should leave it up to them to decide and source the appropriate bits.

### Conclusion

At this point a combination of Solutions 1, 6, 7, and 9 seems to be the best compromise.

**Solution 1:**

> Patch the `__load_completion` function in the `bash_completion` library script so the
> "place-holder prefixed" `/share/bash-completion/completions` directory is searched for
> completions.

**Solution 6:**

> Patch the upstream library to set `$CONDA_BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` to the same
> value as `$BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` and change the double-loading trap to check
> for `$CONDA_BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO` instead of `$BASH_COMPLETION_VERSION_INFO`.

**Solution 7:**

> Add some hook to source the appropriate `bash_completion.sh` on activate.
 
**Solution 9:**

> Ensure the user understands these limitations via package documentation.

[1]: https://github.com/scop/bash-completion
[2]: https://github.com/tartansandal/conda-bash-completion
[3]: https://specifications.freedesktop.org/basedir-spec/basedir-spec-latest.html
